A novel pipeline for the prediction of cardiac events through machine learning, integrated with a loww cost, long term and reusable Holter monitor.

Introduction
Cardiovascular disease is a major health concern globally, with it accounting for nearly 1/4th of all deaths per year in India (Volkov, 2015). The very abrupt nature of Sudden Cardiac Death(SCD) and other cardiac events leads to a slow response time, greatly increasing mortality. This represents three pressing concerns in healthcare:
(A) a lack of reusable Holter monitors made for long term monitoring,
(B) an absence of short-term (under one day) prediction of cardiac events like Sudden Cardiac Death and Myocardial Infarctions,
(C) a lack of integration of machine learning and other computer-assisted analytical methods with wearable ECG devices like Holter Monitors and fitness activity monitors.
The primary objective of our work is to solve these problems by creating an accurate, power-efficient method to predict cardiac events in the short term, integrated with a low-cost wearable Holter patch under $30 (~2600 INR).

Innovation
Our work introduces a low-cost, power-efficient system architecture for short-term cardiac event prediction through an integrated wearable and machine learning pipeline. Unlike conventional Holter monitors that depend on retrospective data analysis, the proposed design incorporates real-time preprocessing, motion-compensated noise suppression, wireless transmission and real-time analysis. Our novel machine learning framework comprises two stages: a BiLSTM-based arrhythmia classifier trained on the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database (F1-score: 99%) and a hybrid CNN-LSTM predictive model (F1-score: 92%) trained on the Sudden Cardiac Arrest Holter Database to anticipate ventricular fibrillation (VFib, a critical precursor to cardiac arrest) onset. To our knowledge, an ML-integrated low-cost reusable Holter monitor is not present in the current literature or deployment. Additionally, a short-term (> 24-hour timeframe) predictive model for cardiac events is also absent from the current literature.

Algorithmic Design
Several algorithmic components were integrated to ensure maximum predictive performance. Initial processing takes place on the device itself. The AD8232, which records the ECG, contains an onboard high pass, low pass and RFI filter. Additionally, motion artefact reduction is achieved using an adaptive filtering algorithm, specifically Recursive Least Squares (RLS) or Normalised Least Mean Squares (NLMS), with the LM6 accelerometer signal serving as the noise reference. The subsequent machine learning pipeline is split into two stages, with the first stage being a BiLSTM(Bi-Directional Long Short Term Memory) classifier trained on the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database to identify and label certain medically significant arrhythmias and beats, achieving an F1-score of 99% The second stage utilises a hybrid CNN-LSTM model trained on the Sudden Cardiac Arrest Holter Database to estimate ventricular fibrillation (VFib) onset, achieving an F1-score of 92% This model assigns ECG segments to four temporal risk categories—low (>24 hours), medium (<12 hours), high (6–12 hours), and critical (<6 hours). This pipeline is optimized for edge deployment, permitting host device flexibility.

Methodology
To ensure user comfort during prolonged use, a breathable, single-lead patch composed of soft, flexible bandaging material with three embedded electrodes was developed, addressing the discomfort and limitations associated with traditional foam electrodes unsuitable for extended monitoring. ECG acquisition is conducted via the AD8232 analog front-end, which integrates a two-pole high-pass, three-pole low-pass, and on-chip radio frequency interference filter to mitigate baseline drift, high-frequency noise, and electromagnetic interference. Real-time motion artefact mitigation employs adaptive filtering algorithms, either Recursive Least Squares (RLS) or Normalised Least Mean Squares (NLMS), using the LSM6DS3 accelerometer signal as a reference input for dynamic noise cancellation. The nRF52840 SoC utilises a 12-bit ADC sampling at 360 Hz and low-latency, energy-efficient Bluetooth Low Energy transmission to the host device. Before machine learning, the data was resampled to 250 Hz to maintain parity with our machine learning model. On the host, a two-stage machine learning pipeline executes inference: Initially, a BiLSTM classifier trained on the MIT-BIH Arrhythmia Database achieves a 99 % F1-score in arrhythmia detection; subsequently, a hybrid CNN-LSTM model trained on the Sudden Cardiac Arrest Holter Database (Greenwald, 1986) predicts wwventricular fibrillation risk across four temporal categories with a 92% F1-score. The models have been quantised for edge deployment and offer platform flexibility. Outputs and risk notifications are delivered to users via a dedicated mobile application, with inference currently performed on smartphones.
Outcomes and Conclusion
Our device and machine learning pipeline have demonstrated both theoretical and practical usability. Our device remains compact, easy to wear and long-lasting, with the onboard battery staying on for 3+ days at a time, at a current draw of approximately 15 mA. Our machine learning pipeline presents an F1-score of 99% and 92% in both stages, respectively. This pipeline has been tested live with our device and a laptop as the host device, and is demonstrating excellent accuracy. Please refer to our project video for a more in-depth demonstration of the same. Due to the inherent difficulties of testing in a real-world environment, it has been tested on the CU Ventricular Tachyarrhythmia dataset (F. M et. al, 1986). and shows a disregardable low false positive rate alongside a 94% accuracy. In the immediate future, our goals are to acquire more compute resources to be able to work with the extensive MIMIC (Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care) IV and III datasets. Additionally, we are awaiting the delivery of a compact PCB (Printed Circuit Board) to reduce the footprint of our device and reduce battery usage. Schematics and photos of the same are available in our Project Video.


References
Goldberger, A. L., Amaral, L. A. N., Glass, L., Hausdorff, J. M., Ivanov, P. C., Mark, R. G., Mietus, J. E., Moody, G. B., Peng, C.-K., & Stanley, H. E. (2000). PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals. Circulation, 101(23), e215–e220. https://doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.101.23.e215
Greenwald, S. D. (1986). Development and analysis of a ventricular fibrillation detector (Master’s thesis). Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Nolle, F. M., Badura, F. K., Catlett, J. M., Bowser, R. W., & Sketch, M. H. (1986). CREI-GARD, a new concept in computerized arrhythmia monitoring systems. Computers in Cardiology, 13, 515–518.
Patel, H. (2023). Outcomes of out of hospital sudden cardiac arrest in India: A review and proposed reforms. Indian Heart Journal, 75(5), 321–326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ihj.2023.08.005
Volkov, S. (2015). Cardiovascular diseases India. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/india/health-topics/cardiovascular-diseases







